One of the questions that we're often asked by communities building
their networks is, "how can we get upstream Internet access to
distribute over our network?" We would like for the answer to be
simply to order a circuit from HUBS that we will deliver at an
appropriate location but that is not yet possible.

In the meantime there are a few possibilities. In much of Scotland the
choices are:

    * One or more DSL lines somewhere close by to an Openreach
      exchange.

    * A wireless circuit delivered as ethernet from Vodafone.

    * An ethernet circuit at an institution that is a member of the
      JANET academic network.

    * An ethernet or cable connection from Virgin Media.

There are tradeoffs involved with each of these choices.

DSL Lines
---------

The first thing to remember is that these are intended as a
consumer-grade service. Even if you order business lines, this is
still the case -- they are intended for a business as an end user not
a business as an Internet Service Provider in its own right. This
matters because of the capacity planning done by the upstreams. It is
expected that each end site, even though their line might be able to
deliver a speed of X Mbps, will only use a small portion of the
available capacity.

Suppose the exchange is fed with a 100 Mbps link, and each DSL line
has a speed of 10Mbps. The providers won't just sell 10 DSL
lines. They are more likely to sell 100 of them or even 500. This is
called oversubscription. And most of the time this works, given the
typical usage of end users. But a community ISP is not a typical
end-user. In fact it will want to make a similar calculation, and
order, say, one 10Mbps DSL line and serve 20 or 50 end-user sites from
it. This has the effect of multiplying the rate at which those lines
are oversubscribed. 2500:1 instead of a more reasonable 50:1. This is
a recipe for poor performance at peak times.

Next it is important to remember that Openreach and BT are not the
same thing -- even though they are related. The arm of BT that one
orders DSL service from is basically a reseller of Openreach. It is
not the only such reseller and several of the others are specialised
in using Openreach infrastrucutre to provide bespoke services for
situations where the normal retail offering doesn't cut it, such as
for a community ISP. Several things matter here:

    * Responsive and clueful technical support; rather than an
      unhelpful call centre, access to engineers at the upstream
      provider who can understand something of the situation and help
      with problems.

    * Getting more than one IP address permanently assigned for use by
      the community ISP.

    * Bonding or aggregating DSL lines which requires the cooperation
      of the upstream provider in order to do properly.

Even in the best case, this is a stopgap measure. One reason is that
even though the initial up-front costs are low, which makes this
approach attractive, in the long run it is more expensive. This is
because of the way DSL resale works. Each circuit is delivered by
Openreach from the end user to some place where the reseller has
equipment. The reseller is then responsible for the connection from
there to the Internet. The problem is that Openreach's charges (an
Ofcom tarrif) for delivering traffic from the end-user to the reseller
are unreasonably expensive (to the tune of being about 10x the typical
cost of traffic from the reseller out to the Internet).

For the reseller this means that they have to either:

    * set the oversubscription ratio unreasonably high -- this only
      works if they are fairly large, large enough that the advantage
      of being able to have access to their engineers and bespoke
      setups are unlikely. Also they may not want a community ISP as a
      client since it would upset their calculations with atypical
      usage. 

    * accept that at peak times there will be contention, which means
      the service is likely to be unacceptably slow for a community
      ISP. 

    * charge at least their actual costs based on usage which is
      likely to make them seem unreasonably expensive for the heavy
      usage of a community ISP.

None of these are ideal, but still the ease of setup and the low cost
of getting started might outweigh these considerations, certainly in
the initial stages when proving that the community network works and
works better than whatever is otherwise available might be more
important.

Vodafone
--------

There is some history here. Actually quite a lot of history. Scottish
Power used to have a telecommunications network. This made a lot of
sense since they have an extensive geographical presence, towers,
wayleaves and so forth. Looking elsewhere in the world, this model has
worked very well -- Hydro One Telecom, a branch of Ontario Hydro, for
example, is one of the main providers of long distance communications
links in central/Eastern Canada. This branch of Scottish Power was
spun off as a separate company called THUS.

THUS had a very good reputation. A proactive and responsive network
operations centre in Glasgow, an extensive network that was the main
alternative to Openreach for long-haul connectivity in Scotland. They
provided much of the infrastructure for the JANET academic network in
the Highlands with UHI as well as the PATHFINDER public service
network. Eventually THUS was bought by Cable & Wireless and by all
accounts the network was left to atrophy. Many of the original
engineers left and took with them much of their knowledge. Access by
the clients to people at Cable & Wireless who knew and understood the
facilities became harder to come by. More upset was on the cards,
however, when Vodafone bought Cable & Wireless in the summer of 2012.

Experience from previous phases of divestment and then consolidation
in the telecommunications industry says that integrating the various
networks involved is a complicated, relatively slow and necessarily
somewhat disorganised endeavour. This background is the major caveat
with going down the route of getting connectivity from Vodafone.

On the bright side, the network is extensive, well built and of
sufficient capacity. The services are designed for exactly the kind of
use that a community ISP -- or any ISP -- might want to make of them.
Much of the service offering is also simply unavailable from any other
source.

The up front costs and commitments are somewhat greater than with DSL
lines, however. This is an option to consider when the community
network moves beyond the pilot or proof of concept phase and starts to
become "serious".

JANET and UHI
-------------

As mentioned above, in the Highlands and Islands that academic network
is run by UHI and runs on top of the old THUS infrastructure. Partly
because UHI is heavily involved in distance education, they are very
sympathetic to the use of these resources by organisations that are
out to get decent connectivity to areas with poor or no Internet
access. Because the underlying facilities are already in place, the
barriers and marginal costs to adding a community ISP into the mix are
fairly low. The Tegola / Hebnet network in the Sound of Sleat and
Small Isles area has been making use of just such an arrangement with
Sabhal MÃ²r Ostaig, the UHI college on Skye, for some time with great
success.

Following UHI's lead, other academic institutions such as the
University of Edinburgh and the University of Stirling have also begun
allowing their networks to be used by community ISPs.

There are some drawbacks to this approach, however:

    * There must be a suitable JANET site already on the network that
      it is feasible to connect to the community network. This is not
      always the case, but it is nice when it is.

    * The economic model of JANET is unusual. Member institutions are
      charged according to their turnover and not their usage. This
      means that none of the JANET member institutions or regional
      networks are set up to bill third parties such as community ISPs
      in the normal way. This can lead to somewhat arbitrary pricing
      regimes.

    * When a JANET institution provides connectivity to a third party
      network they must take care that they do not do it in market
      distorting ways that would make them fall foul of state aid
      rules. See above about "pricing regimes".

    * Because institutional networks are built with institional use in
      mind, they are not generally designed for providing connectivity
      to third parties. This can lead to idiosyncratic and somewhat
      sub-optimal technical configurations.

    * A JANET institution may only provide connectivity to third
      parties where the third parties are not for-profit
      businesses. This means the community ISPs that wish to use JANET
      as an upstream provider must be community interest companies or
      charities or some similar form of not-for-profit entity.

Where available, the relatively low barrier to entry and the good
quality of the upstream network make working with JANET institutions
an attractive option and most likely outweighs the above drawbacks.

Cable and others
----------------

In some parts of the country, primarily the more densely populated
areas there are other options. Virgin Media operates a service over
the old Telewest cable television network. This is, like DSL, a
consumer service and has some of the same drawbacks. They also have
business connectivity available with leased lines and fibre in some
places that are effectively in the same class as the THUS/Vodafone
network -- a good choice but expensive start-up costs.

In some places there are unbundled loop carriers such as TalkTalk and
O2. These are different from Openreach DSL resellers because they have
their own equipment in the exchanges and manage their own long-haul
links from the exchanges back to the core of their networks. There are
also resellers of these LLU providers just as there are of Openreach
(many will resell both) and the advantage here is that the charges
that the reseller must pay to them are not the same Ofcom tarrif as
with Openreach, so, for example, working with a TalkTalk reseller is
likely to be substantially less expensive than working with an
Openreach reseller. Whilst better, these are still consumer services
and the oversubscription calculus still applies.
